HTTP headers are key-value pairs included in HTTP requests and responses to communicate metadata about the data being transmitted.

Purpose: Provide context for the request/response, including browser details, content types, caching rules, and authentication.
Categories: Request headers (sent from client to server) and Response headers (sent from server to client).
Importance: Many headers are required for proper website functionality; missing or incorrect headers can cause display issues or errors.
Examples: Host, User-Agent, Content-Type, Cache-Control.
Common Request Headers
Request headers are sent from the client (typically a web browser) to the server, providing information about the client and the requested resource.

Header
Example

Host
Specifies the domain name of the server. Required when multiple websites are hosted on a single server to route requests to the correct website.
Host: tryhackme.com

User-Agent
Identifies the client software (browser) and version number. Helps the server format content appropriately for the browser.
User-Agent: Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 10.0; Win64; x64) AppleWebKit/537.36

Content-Length
Indicates the size of the data being sent in the request body (e.g., form submissions). Ensures the server receives complete data.
Content-Length: 124

Accept-Encoding
Lists compression methods supported by the client (e.g., gzip, deflate). Allows the server to compress data for faster transmission.
Accept-Encoding: gzip, deflate

Cookie
Sends stored cookies back to the server to maintain session state, remember login information, or recall user preferences.
Cookie: session_id=abc123; user_pref=dark_mode

Detailed Descriptions

      Host
Required for name-based virtual hosting.
Example: A server hosting example.com and test.com uses the Host header to determine which site to serve.

      User-Agent
Includes browser name, version, operating system, and rendering engine.
Servers may deliver different content based on User-Agent (e.g., mobile versions).

      Content-Length
Required for POST and PUT requests with a request body.
Prevents data truncation during transmission.

      Accept-Encoding
Common values: gzip, deflate, br (Brotli).
Reduces bandwidth usage by compressing responses.

    Cookie
Key for session management, authentication, and personalization.
Server sets cookies via Set-Cookie response header; client echoes them in subsequent requests.
Common Response Headers
Response headers are sent from the server to the client, providing metadata about the returned data.

Header
Example

Set-Cookie
Instructs the client to store a cookie for future requests.
Set-Cookie: session_id=xyz789; expires=Thu, 01 Jan 2025 00:00:00 GMT

Cache-Control
Specifies caching policies for the response (e.g., how long to store in cache).
Cache-Control: max-age=3600, public

Content-Type
Indicates the media type of the response (e.g., HTML, CSS, JSON). Helps the client process the data correctly.
Content-Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8

Content-Encoding
Specifies the compression method used on the response data.
Content-Encoding: gzip
Detailed Descriptions

Set-Cookie
Includes cookie name, value, expiration, path, and domain.
Example: Set-Cookie: user_id=123; Path=/; Secure; HttpOnly
Cookies may include flags like Secure (HTTPS only) or HttpOnly (no JavaScript access).

Cache-Control
Directives include max-age (seconds), public, private, no-cache, no-store.
Controls how long browsers or proxies should cache the response.

Content-Type
Also known as MIME type.
Common values: text/html, text/css, application/json, image/png, video/mp4.
Essential for correct rendering; browsers rely on this to interpret data.

Content-Encoding
Complements Accept-Encoding request header.
Common methods: gzip, deflate, br.
